onnaturemagazine.com
Spring 2019 | ON Nature 1
CREDIT
MAKING FORESTS MORE RESILIENT TO CLIMATE CHANGE p. 24
GREEN CORRIDOR CONNECTS COOTES WITH THE ESCARPMENT p. 28
CLIMATE ACTION NEEDS ELECTORAL REFORM p. 38
 Spring 2025  
onnaturemagazine.com
Travel Bug
The common green darner's multi-generational  
migration is anything but common—it is 
an unheralded feat of nature.

ASK TO TRY KITE’S REVOLUTIONARY STABILIZATION FOR YOURSELF AT THE FOLLOWING DEALERS:
PELEE WINGS • DOWNTOWN CAMERA • KHAN SCOPE CENTRE • WILD BIRDS UNLIMITED* • MCBAIN CAMERA  
DON’S PHOTO •  THE CAMERA STORE • MARKARIAN FINE OPTICS • NATURE EXPERT • LE NATURALISTE
(*WBU Toronto & Vancouver Locations)
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
CELEBRATING 
CELEBRATING 
CELEBRATING 
CELEBRATING 
CELEBRATING 
CELEBRATING
CELEBRATING
CELEBRATING
CELEBRATING
CELEBRATING OVER
OVER
OVER
OVER
OVER
OVER
OVER
OVER
OVER
OVER
YEARS
YEARS
YEARS
YEARS
YEARS
www.redravenphoto.com
Distributed exclusively by
RED RAVEN
M A R K E T I N G
APC50: A NEW, UNPRECEDENTED
DIMENSION
IN OBSERVATION
APC50 FEATURES:
• The Latest In Stabilization Tech
• Ed Glass, MHR Advance+ Coatings
• Long Battery Life (AA or Li-ion)
• APC Intelligent Power Saving 
• Waterproof (IPX7)
• Intuitive Ergonomic Design
• Wide Angle View (18X50)
• Lightweight
APC STABILIZED
NEW 18x50ED • 14x50ED
LEARN MORE
Also Available In The APC Stabilized Family Of Optics:
16x42 • 12x42 • 12x30 • 10x30 •  MONO 12x25
IN OBSERVATION
APC50 FEATURES:
APC50 FEATURES:
APC
APC STABILIZED
STABILIZED

onnaturemagazine.com
Spring 2025 | ON Nature 3
(COVER) ONTARIO PARKS
(CLOCKWISE) ROBERT MCCAW; ONTARIO PARKS; MATT FORSYTHE/CITY OF TORONTO; JOHN REAUME
5 This Issue
 
A time of change.
By Caroline Schultz
7 Earth Watch 
 
Environmentalists lose at Ontario Place
 
Rare ﬁsh found in the Thames River
 
Conservation authority land in play
 
And more…
ON THE COVER
 18
As the Dragon Flies 
The annual migration of common green
darner dragonﬂies is less understood
thanthatofmonarchbutterﬂies,but
scientists are starting to discover just
how epic these insects’ journeys are.
By Brian Banks 
24
Adapt or Perish 
With threats to forests multiplying,
Ontario researchers are seeking ways
to keep the woods resilient. Can
forests adapt in time to stay ahead
of climate change?   
By Jade Prévost-Manuel 
28
Ribbons of Green
A natural corridor from Hamilton’s
Cootes Paradise to the Niagara
Escarpment shows the biodiversity
beneﬁts of connected habitat—and of
conservation partnerships.
By Conor Mihell 
35 Nature Network
 
A conservation project with legs.
By Lesley Rudy
36
In House
 
Naturalists celebrate 90 years.
By Kirsten Dahl
37
From the Blog
 
The road to unsustainable growth.
By Jenna Kip
38 Last Word
 
Electoral reform is needed for
 
climate action.
By Sharon Sommerville
28
18
35
24
Contents
 PUBLISHED BY ONTARIO NATURE
FUNDED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA
MADE POSSIBLE WITH THE SUPPORT OF
Spring 2025

4 ON Nature | Spring 2025 
onnaturemagazine.com
Ontario Nature
If you’re reading this ad, 
Birds & Beans is for you.
Help to support preservation of winter habitat for 
Migratory Birds by drinking Certified Bird Friendly coffee.
Buy online at birdsandbeans.ca
Free Shipping in Canada on orders over $45
Great for nature. 
Great for farmers.
Great for you.
Board of Directors
Executive
Chair Kurt Kroesen
Vice Chair Andre Willi
Treasurer Dan Shire
Secretary Adam De Luca
Nature Network Directors
Marilyn Baxter
Sylvia Bowman
Carol Burnup
John Diebolt
James Kamstra
Paul Toffoletti
Directors at Large
Laverne Barretto
Tiffany Lee
Muhammad Qureshi 
Susan Robertson
Ontario Nature Staﬀ 
Executive Director Caroline Schultz
Managing Director Sarah Hedges
Finance Director A.J. Pilobello
Executive Coordinator Lisa Martell
Administrative Coordinator Kamran Minai
Accounting Assistant Penny He
Conservation and Education
Conservation Science and Stewardship Director Smera Sukumar
Conservation Policy and Campaigns Director Tony Morris
Education Manager Christine Ambre
Nature Reserves Manager Marcus Maddalena
Conservation Science Manager Jenna Quinn
OECM Advisor Corina Brdar
Protected Places Project Coordinator Brittney Vezina
Nature Reserves Coordinator Tharanya Ravikumaran
Protected Places Assessment Coordinator Jenna Kip
GIS Coordinator Graeme Smith
Nature Reserves Ecologist Melissa Thomas
Conservation Planning Coordinator Sarah Hasenack
Conservation Science Coordinator Teagan Netten
Education Coordinator Emily Green
Protected Places Assistant Tarun Titus
Municipal Protected Places Assistant Kellsie Bonnyman
Nature Reserves GIS Technician Rylee Goerlitz
Communications and Engagement
Director of Communications and Engagement John Hassell
Database Coordinator Irene Milani 
Communications Coordinator Melina Damian
Nature Network Organizer Lesley Rudy 
Communications Technician Noah Cole
Membership and Development
Director of Development Kirsten Dahl
Annual Fund Manager Lisa Kamenar
Membership Coordinator Hayley Raymond
Grants and Donor Stewardship Coordinator Kayla Salive
Program Funding Coordinator Jennifer Ho
We protect wild species and wild spaces through conservation, education and 
public engagement. Ontario Nature is a charitable organization representing more 
than 30,000 members and supporters, and 150 member groups across Ontario.
@ontarionature
@ontarionature
@ontarionature
@ontarionature
youtube.com/onnature
onnaturemagazine.com
Ontario Nature operates on the traditional territories of diverse 
Indigenous Nations and Peoples across the region that is now 
called Ontario. We honour and show gratitude to the original 
stewards of these lands and waters.

onnaturemagazine.com 
Spring 2025 | ON Nature 5
This Issue
LUIS TINOCO
S
pring is the season of renewal. At this time of year, we all ﬁ nd joy as the trilliums and 
trout lilies emerge from the forest ﬂ oor. We wonder when our favourite songbirds 
will return to stake out breeding territories and ﬁ ll the woods with melodious song. 
We’re awed by how spring peepers—a small wetland frog —can produce such deaf-
ening choruses. The transition from winter to spring is a magniﬁ cent force of nature.
Changes are also on the horizon for our political landscape. With a federal election looming, 
this issue of ON Nature magazine urges us to support leaders who are forces for nature. Conor 
Mihell’s proﬁ le of the Cootes to Escarpment EcoPark System (“Ribbons of Green,” page 28), an 
interconnected mosaic of greenspace that a variety of landowners around Hamilton manage 
cooperatively, is timely. Construction of the controversial Highway 413 is set to begin this year, 
fragmenting other ribbons of green that are essential to enabling the movement of fauna and 
ﬂ ora through southern Ontario’s patchwork quilt of human development. 
Well-known creatures like eastern wolves and Blanding’s turtles are not the only species 
that beneﬁ t from connected habitat. As Brian Banks shows in “As the Dragon Flies” (page 18), 
researchers are just discovering how common green darner dragonﬂ ies rely on a variety of 
ecosystems in making remarkable migrations, spanning multiple generations of insects, from 
Mexico and Central America to Ontario. Forests are also more diverse and resilient when they 
are linked through uninterrupted corridors. Jade Prévost-Manuel’s story, “Growing Stronger” 
(page 24), explores the work of scientists at the Petawawa Research Forest and in other Ontario 
locations to make trees more resilient to climate. 
We must elect leaders who recognize the potential of leveraging natural solutions to climate 
change rather than electing those with destructive outlooks. Furthermore, we must call on our 
governments to ﬁ nally act on electoral reform. In her Last Word article (page 38), Sharon Som-
merville makes a compelling case that proportional representation facilitates cooperation among 
political parties. Denmark’s electoral system has produced enviable climate laws that can serve 
as a template for strong and lasting environmental policies in Canada.
Finally, Ontario Nature is also entering a period of transition. While I prepare to retire from my 
19-year tenure as executive director, I reﬂ ect on the joys of working with a dedicated, passionate 
and insightful staff and board of directors and an incredibly diverse community of supporters. 
I am proud of the gains we have made for conservation in Ontario, including raising awareness 
with this great magazine. I also know we cannot—and trust we will not—rest on our laurels as 
seasons change in the future. 
A Time of Change
By Caroline Schultz
LUIS TINOCO
Publisher Ontario Nature
Editor John Hassell
Contributing Editor Joanna Pachner
Art Director Levi Nicholson
Copy Editor Sarah Weber
Fact Checkers Geri Savits-Fine, Dawn Promislow
Proofreaders Noah Cole, Ron Corkum, Melina Damian, 
Sarah Weber
Advertising
Jeff Yamaguchi
416-508-2382
promedia@rogers.com
Mailing Address
Ontario Nature @ Centre for Social Innovation
720 Bathurst Street, Toronto, ON M5S 2R4
416-444-8419, 1-800-440-2366 
johnh@ontarionature.org
ontarionature.org
Subscribe to ON Nature Magazine
Your subscription includes an Ontario Nature membership 
and a charitable tax receipt. Call 416-444-8419, mail a 
cheque or visit onnaturemagazine.com/subscribe.  
Join Ontario Nature
Give today to help protect wild species and wild spaces 
in Ontario by visiting ontarionature.org/give, mailing a 
cheque or calling 416-444-8419. 
Donors who give more than $10 qualify for Ontario Nature 
membership status and receive a charitable tax receipt. 
Donors who give $50 or more are mailed a hard copy of 
ON Nature magazine. 
Special membership offers are available for seniors and 
students at $40, and families at $55—both of which include a 
hard copy of the magazine. 
Make a monthly contribution of any amount to become a 
Friend of Nature. Learn more at: ontarionature.org/friends. 
Ontario Nature is a registered charity (# 107378952 RR0001).
About ON Nature Magazine
ON Nature is an award-winning quarterly magazine 
published by Ontario Nature. Some recent single copies 
are available for purchase by calling 416-444-8419. 
($9.95, includes taxes, postage and handling). 
Indexed in CPI, CBCA and The Canadian Index. Opinions 
expressed in ON Nature are not necessarily the views of 
Ontario Nature unless expressly stated as such. Advertising 
does not imply endorsement by Ontario Nature. No part of 
the publication may be reproduced without consent of the 
publisher and creators.
Publications mail agreement No. 40064732.
Return postage guaranteed.
ON Nature is printed in Canada with vegetable-based 
inks on FSC-certiﬁ ed paper (50 percent recycled, 25 percent
post-consumer ﬁ bre) by Warren’s Waterless Printing Inc.
ISSN 1711-9138
Spring 2025
VOLUME 65 | NUMBER 1
ON Nature is available online at onnaturemagazine.com. If you read an article you 
think would interest your friends and family, share the magazine link with them.

ENDURANCE ED
UNYIELDING OPTICS FOR  
RELENTLESS PURSUITS
Available in all Urban Nature Stores or online at www.urbannaturestore.ca
8x32  |  10x32  |  8x42  |  10x42
10x50  |  12x50
Green
FROM $349
Extra-Low Dispersion Glass
Phase Corrected Prisms
Twist-Up Eye Cups
Water and Fog Proof
Stay-On Lens Covers
Hawke No-Fault Warranty
ENDURANCE ED
LEARN MORE

onnaturemagazine.com 
Spring 2025 | ON Nature 7
(INSET) RON ERWIN; (MAIN) ERIN CARROLL
A
recent study has confirmed 
that the rare black redhorse, a 
species of sucker, still exists in 
the Thames River watershed.
“It’s a threatened species at 
risk and there are relatively few records of it 
in Canada, so any time that we ﬁ nd them is 
signiﬁ cant,” says Erin Carroll, aquatic biologist 
with the Upper Thames River Conservation 
Authority (UTRCA). 
The three-year survey, which Fisheries and 
Oceans Canada supported, examined loca-
tions in the Upper Thames watershed where 
the ﬁ sh were likely to be found. This species 
lives in fast-ﬂ owing, cool, medium-sized riv-
ers and creeks. They require water with low 
turbidity and strong levels of dissolved oxygen. 
“Excess nutrients, metals, salt, pesticides and 
pharmaceuticals can combine to make a sec-
tion uninhabitable,” notes Carroll. Drought 
and severe weather events, more common 
now due to climate change, pose a threat to 
the species, as does development along creeks 
or rivers.
The black redhorse’s intolerance of poor 
water quality makes it an indicator species for 
habitat conditions. “Just knowing that they’re 
there helps indicate the level of water quality,” 
says Robert Messier, ecologist with the neigh-
bouring Grand River Conservation Authority. 
Fisheries scientists consider the Grand and 
Thames the main Ontario rivers with black 
redhorse populations.
In addition to searching for the black 
redhorse, the project implemented man-
agement practices and stewardship to 
improve and protect river and creek hab-
itat. The UTRCA, along with local land-
owners and volunteers, worked on erosion 
control, planted cover crops and replanted 
riverbank areas. They also planted more 
than 20,000 trees to buffer and protect 
black redhorse habitat.
The survey team recorded 24 sightings 
of black redhorse at 19 different sites. At 
two locations, they found the species in 
each of the study’s three years, which will 
help inform the focus of future protection 
efforts. “It’s a small victory,” says Carroll, 
“and it’s a sign that local conservation 
efforts are working.”
The Fact Is: Invasive Norway maples are 
common on Ottawa’s Parliament Hill. Once 
introduced to a forest, Norway maples 
quickly spread and outcompete native 
trees such as sugar maples and red oak.
Poor sucker: Black redhorse discovery is a beacon of hope for the threatened species.
Rare Fish in T ames River
By Dan Schneider  
?
 Earth Watch
BLACK REDHORSE

8 ON Nature | Spring 2025 
onnaturemagazine.com
CREDIT
POINT PELEE NATIONAL PARK
Breeding Bird Atlas Findings 
By Sharon Oosthoek
Canada’s grassland birds are in trouble. Their 
populations are down by 67 percent since 
1970, according to the latest State of Canada’s 
Birds report released in October. The news 
is mixed for aerial insectivores: the species’ 
numbers have plunged by 43 percent since 
1970, but that decline seems to be levelling 
off, and some species may even be recovering. 
Firmly on the upside, waterfowl populations 
have risen by 46 percent and birds of prey by 
35 percent in that time.
Ontario patterns mirror some of the 
national trends. Preliminary counts from 
volunteers across the province for the 
third Ontario Breeding Bird Atlas indicate 
that grassland species such as upland sand-
pipers and loggerhead shrikes are showing 
up in fewer regions, says atlas coordinator 
Mike Burrell, a zoologist with the Canadian 
Wildlife Service (Ontario). He points to 
agricultural ﬁ elds being turned from pas-
ture or hay that serve as the birds’ habitat to 
corn or soybeans and increased use of pes-
ticides as two reasons for the drop. Aerial 
insectivores such as the purple martin are 
also declining signiﬁ cantly, possibly due 
to climate change—induced mismatches 
between the timing of insect populations 
and bird breeding.
“It’s easy to focus on the negative,” says 
Burrell. “But there are plenty of good-news 
stories.” For example, birds of prey such 
as bald eagles have increased substantially 
JOHN REAUME

onnaturemagazine.com
Spring 2025 | ON Nature 9
CREDIT
across the province in the past few decades 
as levels of eggshell-thinning DDT dropped 
after the pesticide was banned. Red-bellied 
woodpeckers and common ravens are also 
expanding their ranges. Red-bellied wood-
peckers, historically a southern Ontario 
species, are spreading north with warm-
ing winters while ravens are edging south 
from the Canadian Shield. “We’re not sure 
why they have spread south so quickly, but 
corvids [which include ravens] are generally 
regarded as some of the smartest birds we 
have,” says Burrell. 
The Ontario Breeding Bird Atlas is a part-
nership between Birds Canada, Canadian 
Wildlife Service, Ontario’s Ministry of Natu-
ral Resources, Ontario Field Ornithologists 
and Ontario Nature. The third edition is now 
in its ﬁnal year of data collection, and results 
are slated to be published in the fall of 2027.
Jenna Quinn, Ontario Nature’s conser-
vation science manager, says that both the 
report and the atlas highlight the success 
of restoration work conservation organi-
zations have done, especially in wetlands, 
but more needs to be done. “For grasslands, 
meadows and alvars, [restoration] is really 
important,” she says. “We know they’re lim-
ited in our province.”
Fragile futures: New report reveals mixed 
trends for the more than 280 breeding 
birds in Ontario.

10 ON Nature | Spring 2025 
onnaturemagazine.com
(TOP) SCOTT FAIRBAIRN; (BOTTOM) JOHN REAUME
Ruby-throated Hummingbird 
This fast and agile hummingbird, which 
feeds primarily on ﬂ ower nectar, can be 
identiﬁ ed by its brilliant green plumage 
and red throat on the male.
Trillium 
Trilliums require undisturbed mature 
forests and can take up to 10 years 
before they ﬂ ower. If a trillium ﬂ ower is 
plucked, the plant may not bloom again 
for seven years.
Spring Species Watch
QuestNatureTours.com
Carbon oﬀset opportunities available
We are Canada’s leader in nature travel since 1970. 
.Contact us to receive the tour details.
416-633-5666 / 1-800-387-1483
travel@worldwidequest.com
JOIN US FOR
Led by long-time Churchill resident
and naturalist Bonnie Chartier,
October 30 – November 4, 2025
VIEW ONLINE
Tundra Buggy ®
Red Fox
Canada Jay
Polar Bears of
Churchill
The Polar Bear Capital of the World
By Illian Brasselet-Darracq 
By Rajinstan Kamalraj 

onnaturemagazine.com
Spring 2025 | ON Nature 11
SCOTT HEANEY/DREAMSTIME
Earth Watch
Farewell to Nature at Ontario Place
By Brian Banks  
It was a slow death with a sudden end. 
Last October, the hope of preserving a vital 
urban forest and public park on the west 
island of Ontario Place in Toronto was 
effectively laid to rest. That is when Infra-
structure Ontario crews, at the bidding 
of the provincial government, cut down 
850 trees in less than 48 hours—paving 
the way for the construction of a planned 
spa complex on the nine-hectare property.
One ﬁnal appeal was heard in January 
of this year, when the grassroots group 
Ontario Place Protectors challenged 
the provincial government’s legislation 
enabling the project before the Ontario 
Court of Appeal. A ruling was still pending 
at press time, but win or lose, it is already 
too late for a waterfront site that was an 
important stopover for migratory birds 
in spring and fall and a winter haven for 
waterfowl from the Arctic.
“You also had other wildlife: foxes, bea-
vers, muskrat, mink,” says Zunaid Khan, 
past president of the Toronto Field Natu-
ralists. The destruction of the park is a loss 
for the community too, he adds. “One of 
the issues in an urban environment is hav-
ing equity of access to nature. We have a 
long history of leading walks in that area 
because of the nature education opportuni-
ties it provided. And for people who aren’t 
nature nerds like me, it was just a nice place 
to relax.”
Catharine Nasmith, co-founder of 
Ontario Place Protectors, says her group 
is “extremely disturbed” by the project’s 
environmental impact, while noting that 
the court challenge also addressed the leg-
islation exempting the project developer, 
Therme Group, from all provincial heri-
tage and environmental laws. The worry is 
that by setting a precedent, the move could 
enable the government to take the same 
course on future projects.
Adding to that concern are revelations 
in the Auditor General of Ontario’s annual 
report released last December, says Tony 
Morris, conservation policy and campaigns 
director at Ontario Nature. The report 
concludes that the process used to award 
Therme a 95-year lease for the public land 
was not “fair, transparent or accountable.”
“The arguments the government is using 
to justify the project don’t stand up to scru-
tiny,” says Morris. “Basically, it’s develop-
ment at all costs.”
Tragic tale: Some 850 trees were cut for development, which includes a private spa.
Regenerative Tourism
By Nicola Ross   
At the World Trails Network conference, 
held in Ottawa last September, more than 
400 delegates from 35 countries were 
abuzz about a concept called regenerative 
tourism. Building on lessons from regen-
erative agriculture, which uses practices 
that improve the environment, organiza-
tions that follow the approach strive to 
involve and provide beneﬁts to local resi-
dents, businesses and natural ecosystems.
According to Emilie Comeau-Sinclair, 
executive director of strategic initiatives at 
Destination Development (part of Desti-
nation Canada), a crown corporation that 
promotes tourism, regenerative tourism 
shifts the focus from volume (the number 
of visitors) to value (how tourism beneﬁts 
businesses and the local economy). Des-
tination Canada’s 2023 report notes “the 
growing demand for experiences that are 
deeply meaningful and environmentally 
responsible, enriching both the guest and 
the host community.” The report urges 
tourism organizations to regenerate “the 
vitality of our places” by incorporating a 
sense of place, thinking of places as living 
ecosystems, cultivating broad relation-
ships, inviting contributions from locals 
and practising stewardship.
 Trail organizations that follow these 
principles partner with local residents 
and businesses in managing hiking paths, 
creating post-hike events or festivals and 
providing signage about the trails’ history 
and ecology, among other activities. They 
also join forces with communities to mit-
igate negative impacts of hiking, such as 
littering, trespassing and the spread of 
invasive species.
The Bruce Trail exempliﬁes many of 
these principles. Michael McDonald, 
CEO of the Bruce Trail Conservancy, says 
that “we have to consider the infrastruc-
ture that hiking requires, for instance 
parking and washrooms, and not just the 
trail itself.” He adds that the conservancy 
does not only care for the natural land-
scapes the trail crosses but also engages 
others in protecting them.

12 ON Nature | Spring 2025 
onnaturemagazine.com
CREDIT
Andrew Interisano  
instagram.com/theotterbiography
The Natural History Museum listed this photo as Highly Commended in its prestigious wildlife photography competition. Interisano, a 
Creemore-based marketer and storyteller, works for BAM Strategy. 
EASTERN COYOTES
Featured
Photographer

onnaturemagazine.com 
Spring 2025 | ON Nature 13
Conservation begins
by saving one life   
https://wildbirdcarecentre.org/ways-to-help
Support Ontario
Nature in your Will
Will Power is a national public education campaign designed to inspire 
Canadians to think differently about charitable giving.
WWW.WILLPOWER.CA/ONTARIO-NATURE
YOU’VE ALWAYS FOUND
WAYS OF GIVING BACK
Earth Watch
Perched on Lake Superior
Photo workshops & retreats
Stellar paddling experiences
1.800.203.9092
naturallysuperior.com
rockislandlodge.ca
Anti Greenwashing
By Douglas Hunter   
The federal government has revised the 
Competition Act to address “greenwash-
ing”—the practice of making false or mis-
leading statements about the environmental 
beneﬁ ts of a product or service. Some orga-
nizations argue that the new law goes too far 
while others see it as not going far enough.
It is now illegal to make “a statement, war-
ranty or guarantee of a product’s beneﬁ ts for 
protecting or restoring the environment or mit-
igating the environmental, social and ecological 
causes or effects of climate change that is not 
based on an adequate and proper substantiation 
in accordance with internationally recognized 
methodology.” Changes to the act also expand 
the definition of who can bring complaints 
before the federal Competition Tribunal, allow-
ing environmental activists and climate advo-
cacy groups, for example, to lodge complaints.
The amendments have been criticized for 
insufﬁ cient scope. The Canadian Association 
of Physicians for the Environment, Ecojustice, 
Équiterre and the Quebec Environmental 
Law Centre had pushed for expanding their 
reach to cover environmental claims that pro-
mote “activities, brands, and entities.” Mean-
while, Pathways Alliance, which represents 
Canada’s largest oilsands companies, was so 
unhappy with the changes to the law that its 
members ceased all public communications 
about environmental initiatives when it came 
into effect. The group argued that the revised 
section “opens the door for frivolous litigation, 
particularly by private entities who will now be 
empowered to directly enforce this new provi-
sion of the Competition Act.”
The Canadian Climate Law Initiative, 
meanwhile, said that while companies must 
be careful about statements that could be 
perceived as greenwashing, “they should 
not fear or refuse to publicly disclose climate-
related information.” The organization 
added, “Companies should engage in real 
climate actions, avoid boilerplate disclosures, 
get third-party veriﬁ cation, and be transpar-
ent in their communications.” 
Whether the revised act affects companies’ 
environmental claims remains to be seen. The 
impact of the changes also depends on the out-
come of the next federal election, which must 
be held by October 20, 2025.

14 ON Nature | Spring 2025
onnaturemagazine.com
TK
Landﬁll Space Rapidly Running Out
By Ron Corkum  
Ontario has a waste problem. According to the 
latest data from Waste to Resource Ontario, 
an association representing the waste man-
agement and recycling sector, current land-
ﬁll capacity will be exhausted within nine 
years. Today Ontario ships close to a third of 
its garbage to the United States. Michigan, the 
prime recipient, plans to stop accepting it, fur-
ther reducing space for Ontario’s waste. New 
or expanded landﬁlls take up to a decade to 
establish, and local communities are under-
standably reluctant to welcome such facilities. 
The Auditor General of Ontario reported 
that half of residential waste was recycled 
but only 15 percent of non-residential waste 
was likewise treated in 2018. Municipalities 
responsible for managing residential waste, 
which represents about 40 percent of Ontario’s 
garbage, have widely varied recycling require-
ments, while institutions are not required to 
separate recyclables or compostable waste.
Owners of waste incinerators argue that 
incinerators can dispose of waste while 
producing energy. The two existing facilities 
in Ontario are both proposing expansion. The 
process, however, generates signiﬁcant green-
house gas emissions and harmful pollutants, 
including dioxins and furans, particulate mat-
ter and sulphur dioxide. Moreover, the ash 
from incineration, which can weigh as much 
as a third of the weight of the original waste, 
must be transferred to landﬁlls. Karen Wirsig, 
senior program manager at nonproﬁt Envi-
ronmental Defence, says that “approving an 
incinerator is basically like saying, ‘We believe 
in generating lots of waste, burning it in some-
one's backyard and burying the by-product in 
someone else’s backyard for years to come.”
The Ontario government is implementing 
an extended producer-responsibility program 
that shifts responsibility for waste diversion 
from municipalities to producers. Wirsig 
notes, however, that this program has shown 
limited effectiveness so far and covers only 
residential waste. 
“Most small businesses have no viable 
alternative to pitching their waste in the 
garbage for disposal,” says Wirsig. “This 
urgently needs to change.” She argues that 
the provincial government should promote 
options such as repair and renewal of old 
furniture, clothing and appliances, as well 
as elimination of unnecessary packaging and 
single-use products.
Ontario Nature Spring Member Event
Sunday, May 4, 2025
Sydenham River Nature Reserve
Join us for a full day of guided hikes, thought-provoking talks and educational workshops. 
This nature reserve provides habitat for numerous species at risk, several of which are found 
almost nowhere else in Canada but the Sydenham River. Be inspired by rare Carolinian forest, 
tallgrass prairie and a river system that is teeming with life in the spring!
To register and for more information, please scan this QR code.
If you have any questions, please contact Hayley at:
hayleyr@ontarionature.org | 1-800-440-2366
Experience the magniﬁcent 
Sydenham River with us!
Earth Watch

onnaturemagazine.com 
Spring 2025 | ON Nature 15
(TOP) ERWIN; (OPPOSITE PAGE) SCOTT FAIRBAIRN
Developing Conservation Authority Land
By Anne Bell  
The provincial government recently asked 
conservation authorities (CAs) across Ontario 
to prepare strategies and land inventories for 
the areas they own and manage. The inven-
tories must identify whether any sites are 
suitable for housing development, a request 
raising concerns among conservation and 
community organizations.
According to Susan Watson, a founding 
member of community group Get Guelph 
Involved, the regulation “sets the table for a 
province-wide land buffet for developers.” In 
particular, she points to Grand River CA’s deci-
sion to declare surplus eight hectares of prime 
agricultural land within the former Kortright 
Waterfowl Park. Currently farmed, the land 
connects and creates buffers around near-
by wetlands and woodlands and is less than 
20 metres from a Provincially Signiﬁ cant Wet-
land. The property also falls within an area 
that provides habitat for a mixed wader nest-
ing colony and ﬁ ve species at risk.
The government says that the information 
it collects will inform CA decisions about the 
lands they own and manage, but Tony Mor-
ris, Ontario Nature’s director of conservation 
policy and campaigns, wonders why CAs’ pre-
cious protected land should be considered for 
development. “The government’s own Hous-
ing Affordability Task Force said that there 
is already enough land available for develop-
ment,” he says. “Continuing to sacriﬁ ce vital 
natural areas will not solve the housing crisis.”
Many CAs explicitly reject disposing of land 
for development. Conservation Hamilton’s 
policy states, for example, that no properties 
with existing or potential ecological signiﬁ -
cance would be considered for disposition, 
and that in the unlikely event of a disposition 
(none are currently considered), it would seek 
to direct proceeds to securing additional lands 
for conservation.
When CAs do dispose of lands, it is gen-
erally because the properties do not support 
their programs and services or meet priori-
ties for protection and restoration. In some 
cases, the CAs may consider land transfers 
if they identify more appropriate stewards, 
such as federal, provincial or municipal gov-
ernments. Several CAs, including Lakehead 
Region and South Nation Conservation, 
would only contemplate disposition to secure 
lands of greater environmental, economic or 
social beneﬁ t. Toronto and Region CA stip-
ulates that lands would be disposed of only 
if a net ecological beneﬁ t could be achieved.
Rick Wilson, data and analytics manager 
at Conservation Ontario, takes comfort in 
the fact that “CAs have more protections on 
their properties than they did in the past.” 
He cites conservation easements and the 
federal Ecological Gifts Program among 
measures that ensure lands are perma-
nently held for conservation.
Turning the tide: T e government is undermining the integrity of conservation authorities.
© BILL MACDONALD
Join us for a virtual event on Wednesday, 
June 18, 2025 from 6:30-8:30 p.m.
• A fun nature quiz
•  The Executive Director’s conservation 
highlights for 2024
•  The Board Treasurer presenting the 
2024/25 Audited Financial Statements
•  Board of Director elections 
•  The Chair of the Board’s remarks
Registration will soon be available our 
website at ontarionature.org/agm. 
Ontario Nature’s 
Annual General 
Meeting
SHEFFIELD CONSERVATION AREA
© LYNDSEY MARTIN

16 ON Nature | Spring 2025 
onnaturemagazine.com
RON ERWIN
The Frontenac Arch, one of the most bio-
logically diverse areas in Canada, has gained 
greater protection with the expansion of 
the Gananoque Lake Nature Reserve. With 
the support of numerous organizations and 
individuals, Ontario Nature has acquired an 
additional 23 hectares of conservation lands. 
“It’s rare to ﬁ nd intact habitat where we can 
maintain connectivity and corridors for spe-
cies,” says Caroline Schultz, Ontario Nature’s 
executive director.
The area abounds in habitats essential for 
18 species at risk and 20 rare species—from 
eastern musk turtles basking along the natu-
ral shoreline of Gananoque Lake to breeding 
cerulean warblers calling from the treetops in 
the deciduous forests. The property features 
deciduous and mixed forests, treed swamps, 
open rock outcrops, Provincially Signiﬁ cant 
Wetlands and a thicket swamp. 
The Yates family owned the land previ-
ously. Dr. Stephen Yates has been caring for 
the Gananoque Lake property since 2020 
as a volunteer and will continue in this role. 
“We’re just stewards, taking care of the forest 
for the next generation,” he says. 
The long-term vision for the nature 
reserve is to allow the forest to mature 
and to protect the established wetlands. 
The waterfront provides access for ﬁ eld 
research in the lake and wetlands and along 
the shoreline without disturbing the pris-
tine habitat and at-risk species. Protecting 
Ontario Nature Enlarges its Gananoque Lake Nature Reserve
By Smera Sukumar  
Earth Watch
CECROPIA MOTH

onnaturemagazine.com 
Spring 2025 | ON Nature 17
(CLOCKWISE) ANDREW MCLACHLAN; 
SCOTT GILLINGWATER; JOHN REAUME; 
TERRY PARKER
the property will bolster habitat connec-
tivity along the Algonquin to Adirondacks 
corridor and adjacent protected areas 
such as Ontario Nature’s Lost Bay Nature 
Reserve, Thousand Islands National Park 
and other land trust properties.
Ontario Nature’s 26 nature reserves now 
protect 3,182 hectares of rare and vulner-
able habitats that support many species 
at risk. Staff have mapped habitats and, 
together with expert naturalists, have begun 
documenting species at the new property, 
which will inform its management. While 
Gananoque Lake Nature Reserve is not open 
to the public, people interested in learn-
ing more about it or volunteering at any of 
Ontario Nature’s 26 nature reserves can ﬁ nd 
more information at ontarionature.org/
nature-reserves. 
This project was undertaken with the 
ﬁ nancial support of the Government of 
Canada through the Natural Heritage 
Conservation Program (part of Cana-
da’s Nature Fund), the Flanagan Foun-
dation, Ottawa Field Naturalists Club, 
Kingston Field Naturalists, Waterloo 
Region Nature and many Ontario 
Nature members.
Protected paradise: T e property is habitat 
for at least 18 species at risk.
NORTHERN RIBBONSNAKE
EASTERN MUSK TURTLE
GOLDEN-WINGED WARBLER
WESTERN CHORUS FROG

18 ON Nature | Spring 2025
onnaturemagazine.com
CREDIT
As the Dragon Flies 
The annual migration of common green darner
dragonﬂies is less understood than 
that of monarch butterﬂies, but scientists are 
starting to discover just how epic these 
insects’ journeys are.  
By Brian Banks
Winged wanderers: Common green darners 
migrate long distances in search of suitable 
habitat.

onnaturemagazine.com 
Spring 2025 | ON Nature 19
CREDIT
COMMON GREEN DARNER DRAGONFLY

20 ON Nature | Spring 2025 
onnaturemagazine.com
(PREVIOUS SPREAD) RON ERWIN 
(INSET) JIM RICHARDS; (CLOCKWISE, BOTTOM) ROBERT MCCAW, ONTARIO PARKS, NOAH COLE
T
he swarm envelops David 
Bree as he approaches the 
beach at Presqu’ile Provincial 
Park. Hundreds of dragon-
ﬂ ies are whizzing around him, 
snap-turning in every direction as though 
attached to invisible yo-yo strings, then 
suddenly changing course, again and again.
He points his camera above and clicks, 
freezing the action. In the image: a seem-
ingly chaotic squadron of tiny ﬂ ying ﬁ gures 
silhouetted against a pale blue background; 
T-shaped insects with thick round heads and 
bodies, rigidly perpendicular wings and long, 
thin tails, tilted at all angles, facing every way.
Bree had seen this spectacle before. As 
chief park naturalist at Presqu’ile for 16 years 
before retiring in 2021, he has come to view 
this annual gathering of common green darn-
ers, one of North America’s largest and most 
ubiquitous dragonﬂ y species, as a highlight of 
the late-summer season. “If you walk through 
the ﬁ elds and along the shoreline anywhere 
in Prince Edward County in the ﬁ rst week of 
September, you can often scare up hundreds 
of green darners,” he says. 
At other times, getting a close encounter 
with even one of these colourful insects—
named for their iridescent green face and 
thorax—requires more effort. In spring and 
summer, adult green darners ﬂ y solo, hunt-
ing small insects on the wing. But come 
August and September, they move south 
as one. The swarms at Presqu’ile and else-
where in the province are participating in 
a great annual migration, much like that of 
the storied monarch butterﬂ y. In winter, 
common green darners have been spotted 
in the southern United States, Mexico and 
Central America. However, while the mon-
arch’s multi-generational migratory cycle 
has been heavily studied, inspiring an inter-
national effort to conserve the habitat these 
butterﬂ ies depend on, details of the green 
darner’s transcontinental journey are just 
starting to be understood.
“Monarch has gotten a lot of attention, and 
rightly so,” says Bryan Pfeiffer, a ﬁ eld naturalist 
and adjunct instructor at the University of Ver-
mont. “But when I tell folks, even somewhat 
accomplished naturalists, that some dragon-
ﬂ ies migrate, they’re like, ‘Wow, really?’”
In recent years, Pfeiffer notes, a growing 
number of birders have taken up dragonﬂ y 
watching. The green darners’ group staging is 
a scene akin to that of the kettling of hawks 
and other raptors for fall migration. (In fact, 
the species are often seen together, with some 
raptors eating the dragonflies.) But there 
are big differences. “We take migration for 
granted when we think about birds,” says 
Pfeiffer, “but that this little insect that weighs 
not much more than a drop of water can move 
great distances is pretty cool.”
Scientists believe there is much to gain 
by ﬁ lling in the missing puzzle pieces of 
the green darner’s annual cycle. “Dragon-
ﬂ ies are key players in multiple ecosystems 
over their lives, both as consumers and as 
prey,” says Ryan Norris, associate professor 
in the department of integrative biology at 
the University of Guelph. “For us to under-
stand our impact on different ecosystems, 
it’s important to understand the life histo-
ries of organisms that move through them. 
When are they there? How long are they 
there? Where else are they going? If we don’t 
Dragonﬂ y diversion: Some birders have shifted 
to also watching dragonﬂ ies.
Bon appétit: Purple martins feed on common 
green darners.
PURPLE MARTIN
COMMON GREEN DARNER NYMPH

onnaturemagazine.com 
Spring 2025 | ON Nature 21
JOHN REAUME
have that information, it’s hard to make good 
conservation decisions.”
G
reen darners may have the word “com-
mon” in their name, but their annual 
migration makes them exceptional. Only 
about a dozen of the 135 dragonﬂ y species 
native to Ontario migrate. Similarly, of the 
more than 330 species of dragonﬂ ies found 
in North America, just 16 are considered true 
migrants. Given that insects in the order Odo-
nata (which includes dragonﬂ ies and dam-
selﬂ ies) and their immediate ancestors were 
among the ﬁ rst organisms to achieve ﬂ ight 
roughly 300 million years ago, it is not sur-
prising, says Pfeiffer, that some have evolved 
to ﬂ y great distances. But why only a few do 
is unclear.
One factor that has held back research 
on dragonﬂ y migration is the insect’s size. 
Green darners are generally too small to be 
ﬁ tted with the radio and satellite transmitters 
commonly used to track birds on their migra-
tions. However, in a study published in 2019, 
two Guelph students (supported by Norris) 
managed to put radio transmitters on 38 green 
darners captured on the Saugeen (Bruce) Pen-
insula. They discovered that one travelled 122 
kilometres in a single day; another individual 
reached a (wind-assisted) top speed of 77 kilo-
metres per hour. While the study was too lim-
ited in scope to support broad conclusions, it 
conﬁ rmed that green darners are capable of 
long-distance ﬂ ight. 
To date, most of what is known about 
dragonfly migration has come from two 
types of molecular study: DNA analysis, 
which reveals how much populations in 
different locations interact; and stable-
hydrogen isotope analysis, which detects 
a geographic signature in animal tissue 
pinpointing the latitude where individuals 
were born, which enables researchers to cal-
culate how far they travelled before capture.
A few years ago, isotope analysis yielded 
the biggest breakthrough thus far in under-
standing the common green darner’s annual 
migratory life cycle: that it involves three gen-
erations of dragonﬂ ies. The research was done 
by a team of U.S. scientists using wing tissue 
from more than 850 com-
mon green darners, includ-
ing museum samples as 
much as 140 years old. They 
learned that the generation 
that emerges here migrates 
to the south, breeds and 
dies; their offspring hatch 
and emerge in the south and 
remain there; then a third 
generation comes north 
in the spring, where they 
breed and die. The distances 
they travel are impressive: 
upwards of 680 kilometres going south and at 
least 650 kilometres coming north.
Not only did the study conﬁ rm that the 
green darners seen leaving Ontario in the 
fall will never return, but the researchers 
also paired their isotope ﬁ ndings with com-
munity science observations to show that 
Marvelous migration: Common green darners 
travel from Ontario to as far as Central America 
in their fall migration.
COMMON GREEN DARNER DRAGONFLY
If you walk through the ﬁ elds 
and along the shoreline anywhere 
in Prince Edward County in the 
ﬁ rst week of September, you 
can often scare up hundreds of 
green darners.
“

22 ON Nature | Spring 2025 
onnaturemagazine.com
(TOP) RYAN NORRIS, (BOTTOM) RON ERWIN
that came up early. As a result, the baby 
purple martins starved,” says Ami Thomp-
son, assistant professor of biology at North 
Carolina Wesleyan University. “With more 
data, we hope to understand if climate 
change is going to cause a mismatch in the 
abundance of common green darners as a 
food source for these birds.” 
To that end, Thompson is in the ﬁ nal 
green darners’ northward migration tracked 
the seasonal advance of the 9 C mean daily 
temperature threshold. This is why common 
green darners sometimes show up in the 
north before all ponds and wetlands are free 
of ice. Those early ﬂ iers are migrants from 
the south, explains Colin Jones, provincial 
invertebrate zoologist at the Ontario Min-
istry of Natural Resources’ Natural Heritage 
Information Centre, whereas the ﬁ rst local 
nymphs that emerge as adults usually do not 
appear until June.
I
sotope analysis has limitations, however. 
It can identify the approximate latitude 
where dragonﬂ ies emerge but not speciﬁ c 
locations. It also says nothing about their 
actual journey.
“There’re still many unanswered ques-
tions,” says Smera Sukumar, Ontario 
Nature’s conservation science and steward-
ship director. “We need further research on 
how they’re navigating and to understand 
what threats they face in different parts 
of their life cycle.” That information, she 
notes, could support an international effort 
to protect wetland habitats, which play an 
important role not only in the dragonﬂ ies’ 
larval stage but also in their adult stage and 
migration. (Like all dragonﬂ ies, common 
green darner nymphs hatch from eggs laid 
in ponds, lakes, slow streams and rivers, 
later emerging as winged adults.)
The potential impact of climate change 
on green darner migration also merits 
study. As one of the ﬁ rst insects to ﬂ y in 
the spring, green darners are an important 
food source for early-migrating birds such 
as purple martins. “There have been years 
when a big weather event, like a snow-
storm, killed all the common green darners 
preparatory stages of a new common green 
darner tracking study in which she plans to 
use radio tracking tags much lighter than 
those used previously. Her aim is to partner 
with other researchers to tag large numbers 
of green darners as they migrate across the 
continent. “We don’t know much about how 
they move individually. That’s what these 
little trackers will tell us,” she says. “It’s 
like this is a book and this is just the ﬁ rst 
chapter. I want to read it and ﬁ nd out what’s 
going on.” 
Brian Banks is a writer and editor who has 
regularly contributed to ON Nature.
Tracking travel: Researchers seek to better 
understand migration behaviour.
T e Dragonﬂ ies of Ontario 
Ontario is a treasure trove for dragonﬂ y watchers, thanks to its warm summers and wide 
range of habitats. At least 135 of the 154 species of dragonﬂ ies that live in Canada are 
found here.
Dragonﬂ ies occupy many different ecological niches. Along with the common green darner, 
migratory species include the vividly named black saddlebags, the variegated meadow-
hawk and spot-winged and wandering gliders. The wandering glider does not breed here but 
is a regular summer visitor. It is also considered the world’s most travelled dragonﬂ y, capable 
of crossing oceans in migrations that span thousands of kilometres.
Ontario is also home to numerous endangered dragonﬂ ies, such as the rapids clubtail, 
pygmy snaketail and Hine’s emerald, the last of which can be found in only one loca-
tion: the Minesing Wetlands. But even more common dragonﬂ ies can be hard to spot 
given their elusive behaviour. Several species of shadowdragons, for example, leave their 
roosts (presumed to be in trees) only brieﬂ y at dusk, ﬂ ying low over rivers and streams 
to hunt other insects.
—Brian Banks
BLACK SADDLEBAGS DRAGONFLY
Learn more in Ontario Nature’s dragonﬂ y 
and damselﬂ y guide: ontarionature.org/
dragonﬂ ies.

Follow the 
rules for 
family fun.
Bobbi the Buoy says: 
“When exploring Ontario’s great outdoors, be sure 
to avoid danger zones near dams and hydro stations 
and respect all warning signs and barriers.”
Stay Clear. Stay Safe.

24 ON Nature | Spring 2025 
onnaturemagazine.com
CREDIT
EASTERN WHITE PINE

onnaturemagazine.com
Spring 2025 | ON Nature 25
RON ERWIN
Adapt or Perish 
With threats to forests multiplying, Ontario researchers are 
seeking ways to keep the woods resilient. Can forests adapt in 
time to stay ahead of climate change?   
By Jade Prévost-Manuel
Researching resilience: Scientists are studying 
forest adaptations to climate change.
C
urved around the southern 
shoreline of Corry Lake, the 
10,000-hectare forest near 
the community of Chalk 
River is habitat for scurrying 
woodland creatures and contains tower-
ing trees that frame woodland paths, lakes 
and ponds. The area looks like many other 
Ontario forests, but it is actually a living 
laboratory. Called the Petawawa Research 
Forest (PRF), this is where some of Cana-
da’s leading forestry researchers are work-
ing to make forests stronger and healthier. 
Ontario’s forests are under increasing 
pressures from a changing climate, but 
how these changes will affect forest ecosys-
tems is not entirely predictable, says Trevor 
Jones, a research scientist co-leading the 
Adaptive Silviculture for Climate Change 
project at the PRF. A branch of experimen-
tal forestry that studies ways to manage the 
growth and composition of forests, adap-
tive silviculture aims to help forests with-
stand the stress of ecological and climatic 
shifts through different forms of interven-
tion. “Forests are going to change,” says 
Jones. “Either you can do the work now to 
help them change, or you can do the work 
later to try to get productive forests once 
they have fallen apart.” 
Ontario encompasses more than 70 mil-
lion hectares of forest. These vast wooded 
stretches represent 20 percent of Canada’s for-
ests and 2 percent of the world’s. Combined, 
the province’s forests would constitute an area 
the size of Germany, Italy and the Netherlands. 
“Ontario is a forest province,” says Corina 
Brdar, OECM advisor with Ontario Nature. 
“Most of the natural ecosystems here are for-
est ecosystems.” 
Diversity of species and diversity of for-
est structure make forests more resilient 
to certain disturbances. Diversity is a good 
way of protecting against some natural dis-
turbances that target individual species. If 
climate change weakens forest ecosystems, 
the ecological and economic consequences 
would be devastating. Forests are both a 
natural resource that contributes around 
$5 billion annually to Ontario’s GDP and 
storehouses billions of tonnes of carbon. 
If forest biodiversity diminishes, wildﬁres 
could become far more severe and difﬁcult 
to contain. Warming temperatures could 
also bring new pathogens and invasive 
tree-damaging insects, whose natural ranges 
the cold typically keeps in check. Jones says 
that warmer and drier conditions—includ-
ing potential prolonged droughts—could 
turn the PRF and other forests that grow on 
sandy, rocky soils into another ecosystem 
altogether: “If it gets too bad, you start push-
ing these systems [to turn into] savannas.”
T
he PRF is the oldest continuously oper-
ating research forest in Canada. Since 
the federal government established it in 
1918, PRF scientists have worked on a range 
of forest projects, from reforestation tech-
niques to epidemiological studies on the 
spruce budworm.
The PRF is located in a transition zone 
between the forests of the Great Lakes
—St. Lawrence and the boreal region, allow-
ing researchers to study how trees in these 
different environments respond to climate 
change and researchers’ interventions. 
Among the PRF’s more than 2,000 experi-
mental plots are areas of white pine where 
some trees are more than 100 years old. 
Their future is uncertain, 
however. Scientists expect 
white pine, a dominant 
species in many forests, to 
be particularly vulnerable 
to climate change because 
the tree does not thrive in 
dry conditions. Drought 
can weaken its ability to 
regenerate effectively. 
“White pine hasn’t had 
a good mass seed crop in [the PRF] for 
decades,” says Jones. “It’s really struggling 
to produce a reliable seed crop that can be 
counted on to regenerate the forest natu-
rally here.” 
Jones’ team is trying to address this 
problem by bringing in white pines from 
more southern climes. The strategy, called 
assisted migration, is grounded in the 
hypothesis that trees descended from more 
southerly stock can better withstand the 
expected warmer and drier conditions than 
trees native to the area can. The seed cones 
and seedlings that Jones and his colleagues 
are transplanting come from four differ-
ent areas. The farthest south seed source 
is Virginia and the rest are from various 
White pine hasn’t had a good 
mass seed crop in [the PRF] 
for decades. It’s really struggling 
to reproduce naturally here.
“

26 ON Nature | Spring 2025 
onnaturemagazine.com
(TOP) RON ERWIN; (BOTTOM) NATURAL RESOURCES CANADA
(OPPOSITE PAGE) NATURAL RESOURCES CANADA/GOVERNMENT OF CANADA
locations in Ontario, including Barrie—all 
locations within the species’ natural range. 
The team plans to monitor how the result-
ing trees help the forest regenerate in the 
years to come.  
While assisted migration may expand 
the genetic diversity of a forest ecosystem, 
which in turn may boost its ability to ﬁ ght 
stressors such as extreme weather, disease, 
and warmer temperatures, the strategy 
has its critics—especially when plants 
are translocated outside of their natural 
range. Some plants have the potential to 
become invasive or can carry diseases and 
parasites that harm native plants. They 
can also threaten existing populations 
through hybridization, whereby hybrid 
plants compete with locally adapted vari-
ants and can even drive the native species 
to extinction. 
These scenarios are unlikely with the spe-
cies that Jones and his team are migrating, he 
says. In any case, the imminent threat makes 
creative solutions essential. “If we don’t do 
something about species composition and 
structure,” says Jones, “it will be difﬁ cult to 
maintain these forests.” 
W
hite pine is not the only species 
experiencing a long reproductive 
drought in southern Ontario. The endan-
gered butternut is another. Once common 
along stream banks and forest edges, the 
species’ population has been decimated 
by the butternut canker fungus and the 
steady loss of its traditional forest habi-
tat. Individual butternut trees are now so 
isolated that perpetuating themselves has 
become difﬁ cult. 
To solve the butternut’s fertility woes, 
the Forest Gene Conservation Association 
(FGCA), a not-for-proﬁ t focused on con-
serving the genetic diversity of forests, has 
established a network of breeding orchards 
within the range of the species that serve 
as genetic archives. The trees in these 
orchards are grafted from healthy butter-
nuts that show tolerance to butternut can-
ker, the tree’s primary existential threat. 
Kristen Sandvall, the FGCA’s seed and cli-
mate change program manager, calls the 
Imperfect ﬁ x: Assisted migration helps genetic 
diversity but can have unintended consequences.
Future-prooﬁ ng: Saving seeds from the health-
iest trees helps reforestation.
SHAGBARK HICKORY SEEDS
BUR OAK SEEDS

onnaturemagazine.com 
Spring 2025 | ON Nature 27
resulting hubs of resilient trees a “dating 
service for lonely trees.” 
“Seed orchards allow us to ensure that 
we have good genetic diversity from known 
sources that can then be put back onto the 
landscape,” says Sandvall, whose organization 
also works on conserving other tree species, 
such as black ash. The genetic information 
that trees pass down through seeds plays a 
large part in determining the survival not only 
of individual trees but of a forest, she adds. 
Seeds from most conifer species can be 
preserved for decades if stored correctly, but 
not every tree’s seeds can be easily preserved. 
Seeds from beech, oak and hickory, for exam-
ple, cannot be stored for long periods of time. 
Identifying the best seeds and safely storing 
them is a skill that the FGCA teaches in its 
Certiﬁ ed Seed Collector Course, a program 
for conservation groups, forestry companies, 
native seed nurseries, and even individuals. 
The FGCA provides other training opportu-
nities in this area as well. 
The seeds that the FGCA collects through 
projects can end up in a variety of places, from 
test plots in the PRF to the country’s National 
Tree Seed Centre, which stores seeds from 
more than 200 tree and shrub species. “We 
can’t move a 400-year-old oak tree,” says Sand-
vall, “but we can move its offspring and seeds.”
As for the PRF, it will be five or six 
years—the time it takes for tree seedlings 
to become established—before Jones and 
his team will know whether their efforts 
will be successful. As the seedlings grow, 
they will help the researchers understand 
how soil moisture, genetic diversity, forest 
structure and type, and the density of tree 
stands can affect the forest’s resilience. 
Arming a forest with the defences it needs 
to weather climate change may require cre-
ating new forest conditions and changing 
the forest’s makeup. Forests of the future 
may also need active management. “If you 
leave a forest alone, it will do something, but 
it will almost certainly not be what was there 
before,” says Jones. 
Jade Prévost-Manuel, a freelance journalist, 
has written several stories for ON Nature.
Future prooﬁ ng: Seed containers at the National 
Tree Seed Centre.
Trees help improve air, water, and soil quality,
provide shelter from wind and snow, boost 
biodiversity and wildlife habitat and so much more!
ForestsCanada.ca/PlantTrees
Learn more at
Forests Canada’s planting and stewardship programs 
make increasing forest cover easier and more affordable 
by signiﬁcantly reducing the costs of tree planting on private property.
Interested in 
planting trees
on your property?

28 ON Nature | Spring 2025
onnaturemagazine.com
CREDIT

onnaturemagazine.com
Spring 2025 | ON Nature 29
CREDIT
Ribbons of Green 
A natural corridor from Hamilton’s Cootes Paradise to the 
Niagara Escarpment shows the biodiversity beneﬁts of connected 
habitat—and of conservation partnerships.  
By Conor Mihell
Cootes to Escarpment EcoPark System:
Roads and urban development in and around 
Hamilton and Burlington compete for space 
with nature. 

30 ON Nature | Spring 2025 
onnaturemagazine.com
(PREVIOUS SPREAD) MARK ZELINSKI 
(BOTTOM) JONATHAN DAKIN/ADOBE STOCK
A
cross southern Ontario, ves-
tigial forests, grasslands, 
savannas, wetlands and other 
natural ecosystems shine 
like gems amid sprawling 
housing developments, gravel pits, big-
box plazas, industrial parks and roads. 
These pockets of “near-urban nature” 
support communities of ﬂ ora and fauna—
including humans—with habitat and eco-
system services such as ﬂ ood prevention, 
water ﬁ ltration and outdoor recreation. A 
prime example lies between and within 
the boundaries of Hamilton and Burling-
ton, extending from Lake Ontario’s marshy 
shores at Cootes Paradise to the angular 
limestone outcroppings of the Niagara 
Escarpment. Spanning about 2,200 hec-
tares, the Cootes to Escarpment EcoPark 
System’s partner-owned lands support over 
60 species at risk, including Jefferson sal-
amanders and Blanding’s turtles, and is a 
key stopover area for millions of migrat-
ing birds. Located in the heart of Canada’s 
densest urban area, it is a model of how 
people can collaborate to create ribbons of 
green across the landscape.
The Cootes to Escarpment EcoPark 
System includes several recognized envi-
ronmental designations, among them 
Environmentally Signiﬁ cant Areas, Areas 
of Natural and Scientific Interest and a 
UNESCO Biosphere Reserve, as well as a 
Provincially Significant Wetland. Yet its 
transformation over time is what Tomasz 
Wiercioch of Burlington and Hamilton’s 
Royal Botanical Gardens ﬁ nds most amaz-
ing. “There were old farms, open-pit mines 
and dumps, all of which have been actively 
restored over the past 100 years to the state 
they are in now,” Wiercioch says. “It’s a 
result of a lot of organizations, private land-
owners and individuals working together. 
For me, that’s really unique.”
Wiercioch is the coordinator of a coali-
tion of nine partners, including both gov-
ernment and not-for-proﬁ t land-owning 
agencies, that came together in the name 
of conservation in 2006. As a sign of effec-
tive collaboration and stewardship, he 
highlights the presence of Jefferson sala-
manders, shiny grey and brown amphib-
ians with blue spots that move between 
intact deciduous forests, wetlands and 
clean woodland ponds over their life cycle 
and occur in only a few places in southern 
Ontario. He also notes recent observations 
of rare freshwater bivalves, including the 
mapleleaf, a palm-sized mussel with scal-
loped edges, as indicative of improving 
water quality in streams. Cootes Paradise 
Marsh has long been a provincial birding 
hot spot. In 2012, Lake Ontario’s ﬁ rst breed-
ing pair of bald eagles 
in half a century nested 
here, and generations of 
eaglets have followed, says 
Wiercioch. “In spite of all 
the ongoing pressures and 
the history of industry,” he 
adds, “nature still thrives.” 
Less than 6 percent of 
southern Ontario’s land is 
protected, and one-third 
of Canada’s human pop-
ulation lives here. Given 
the pressures of development, along with 
the systematic erosion of Ontario’s Endan-
gered Species Act and a series of provincial 
governments’ wavering commitments to 
safeguard key features such as the Green-
belt, not surprisingly the province’s list of 
species at risk grew by 22 percent between 
2009 and 2020, and most of those species 
are dependent on habitat in southern 
Ontario. Cootes to Escarpment EcoPark 
System is part of a constellation of refuges, 
such as Rouge National Urban Park east of 
Toronto, that offer tantalizing glimpses of 
what was once a vast stronghold of biodi-
versity. It is also a vision of a future where 
natural corridors link southern Ontario’s 
remaining chunks of intact habitat. “This 
is the most urban area in Canada,” says 
Wiercioch. “The EcoPark System is a liv-
ing lab where we can ﬁ nd answers to the 
question of how we can all coexist.” 
I
n 1967, American ecologists Rob-
ert MacArthur and E.O. Wilson first 
described a concept conservationists today 
take for granted: larger areas, and those 
that are closer or more connected to other 
patches of natural habitat, provide habitat 
for more species than smaller, insular pock-
ets do. MacArthur and Wilson’s Theory of 
Island Biogeography has been repeatedly 
proven in all corners of the world, includ-
ing southern Ontario, where the remain-
ing oases of nature are essentially islands, 
Making connections: Species need natural 
cores and corridors to ﬂ ourish.
This is the most urban area in 
Canada. The EcoPark System 
is a living lab where we can ﬁ nd 
answers to the question of 
how we can all coexist.
“
ROYAL BOTANICAL GARDENS

onnaturemagazine.com 
Spring 2025 | ON Nature 31
(CLOCKWISE) ROBERT MCCAW; GORDON C. SNELLING/INATURALIST CC BY 4.0; RON ERWIN
adrift in a sea of development—and bio-
diversity has suffered accordingly. Along 
with protecting the largest, most intact 
natural spaces in such fragmented regions, 
recognizing, restoring and protecting the 
corridors between them is necessary to 
preserve ecosystem functions across the 
entire landscape.
The Jefferson salamander is just one 
example of the way species rely on a diverse 
array of habitat conditions through their 
life cycle. Another is the redside dace, a 
minnow named for its ﬂ ashy colours that 
is listed as Endangered in Ontario. Many 
of this species’ remaining populations are 
concentrated in headwater streams of the 
Greenbelt, an 800,000-hectare arch of 
woodlots, farms and rural lands surround-
ing Toronto where legislated restrictions 
control urban sprawl. Here the minnows 
feed on insects in cool, shady pools and 
move to shallow rifﬂ es to spawn in May and 
June. Converting forests to urban and agri-
cultural landscapes causes sedimentation 
and warmer water temperatures, wiping 
out redside dace. 
Tony Morris, Ontario Nature’s conser-
vation policy and campaigns director, says 
the Ontario government’s plan to sell off 
chunks of the Greenbelt to housing devel-
opers could have spelled the end for redside 
dace and threatened many other species. 
Public outcry and a politically damaging 
scandal thwarted those plans, yet the pro-
vincial government has remained steadfast 
in its intentions to build Highway 413 and 
the Bradford Bypass, two projects that will 
destroy vital farmland, high-quality forests, 
many wetlands and signiﬁ cant wildlife hab-
itat, and will threaten the ecological integ-
rity of watersheds.
“Headwaters are essential for maintain-
ing connectivity for aquatic species that 
move up and down waterways,” says Mor-
ris. “Riparian zones are important for land 
species as well. Put a highway through that 
and you’re creating a wall for many species. 
Stormwater will run into the creeks, taking 
all the contaminants with it. No amount of 
engineering or mitigation can completely 
eliminate the impacts.”
Premier Ford is not the ﬁ rst to lead a 
government in Ontario that prioritizes 
development over conservation. Only 
about 11 percent of Ontario’s land mass is 
protected (compared to 19.7 percent and 
16.9 percent in British Columbia and 
Quebec, respectively), and few tangible 
additions have been made in the last two 
decades. That is why local collaborations 
like the Cootes to Escarpment EcoPark 
System are so refreshing. The coalition 
comprises the Royal Botanical Gardens, 
the Hamilton Naturalists’ Club, the Bruce 
Trail Conservancy, Conservation Halton, 
Halton Region, the Hamilton Conserva-
tion Authority, McMaster University, the 
City of Hamilton and the City of Burling-
ton. The partnership emerged in the wake 
of cleanup efforts in Hamilton Harbour, 
about 20 years ago, Wiorcioch explains. 
“All partners had a long history of stew-
ardship and restoration work in the Ham-
ilton and Burlington areas,” he says. “They 
talked about how they could work better 
together. No existing models [such as a pro-
vincial or national park] ﬁ t exactly, so they 
made their own.”
Each partner participates voluntarily 
and manages the land it owns in the Eco-
Park System. The EcoPark System is not a 
regulatory authority. The partners act on 
a consensus basis to set and meet conser-
vation targets that they have planned and 
agreed to. The model is based on a “collab-
oration of equals,” Wiorcioch explains. “If 
we can’t reach consensus, it means we hav-
en’t talked enough. The focus is on shared 
goals, like connectivity.”
The Hamilton Naturalists’ Club, an 
Ontario Nature group, has been involved 
in the area for over a century. The 2004 
purchase of the 18.6-hectare Cartwright 
Nature Sanctuary in nearby Dundas, 
acquired in partnership with Conserva-
tion Halton, was a key milestone in land 
protection in that area, and in looking at 
different ways to protect land, says Jen 
Baker, the organization’s general manager. 
It helped to reduce the threat of develop-
ment in a part of the Cootes to Escarpment 
EcoPark System with lush forests of red 
oak, shagbark hickory and rare sweet pig-
nut hickory, as well as one of Canada’s only 
colonies of American colombo, an endan-
gered wildﬂ ower. Baker says an additional 
67 hectares of protected land have been 
EcoPark partnership: System lands provide 
habitat for more than 60 species at risk.
BLANDING’S TURTLE
JEFFERSON SALAMANDER
MAPLELEAF MUSSEL

32 ON Nature | Spring 2025
onnaturemagazine.com
ANDREW MCLACHLAN
along Cootes Drive in Hamilton. Corridors 
of movement between and within part-
ner-owned properties for species such as 
northern short-tailed shrew and white-tailed 
deer were also predicted by studies the Eco-
Park System conducted.
“Cootes to Escarpment EcoPark System 
brings attention to the signiﬁcance of nat-
ural features and the connections between 
them in this heavily urbanized area,” says 
Baker. “This includes connections with pri-
vate landowners about the importance of 
their property on the landscape. It helps 
the partners to see areas where natural 
connections [to other natural spaces] can 
be restored.”
secured in Dundas through the collabo-
rative efforts of EcoPark System partners. 
Meanwhile, the City of Burlington has 
closed a section of King Road each spring 
since 2012 to allow Jefferson salamanders to 
move freely between overwintering areas to 
breeding habitats in ephemeral forest pools. 
The coalition has also predicted critical pas-
sageways for Blanding’s turtles, which travel 
up to two kilometres from Cootes Paradise 
Marsh and Grindstone Marsh to upland 
nesting sites from May through early July. 
Royal Botanical Gardens collaborated with 
the City of Hamilton and Hamilton Conser-
vation Authority to install roadside barriers 
to reduce Blanding’s turtle road mortality 
M
orris notes that the public is becoming 
more aware of the importance of nat-
ural corridors, in part due to programs like 
Cootes to Escarpment EcoPark System and 
campaigns like the Southern Ontario Nature 
Coalition, which includes Ontario Nature. 
In 2023, Parks Canada recognized Cootes to 
Escarpment EcoPark System with funding to 
serve as a pilot project for a new federal ini-
tiative to identify priority areas for ecological 
corridors, as part of efforts to reach Canada’s 
conservation target of protecting 30 percent 
of its land mass by 2030. Wiorcioch says the 
money was earmarked for habitat restoration 
and public outreach, including a McMaster 
University—led project to build relationships 
between local Indigenous communities and 
conservation groups.
Emerging from the pilot project, Parks 
Canada identiﬁed 23 key corridors, includ-
ing ﬁve in Ontario. Cootes to Escarpment 
EcoPark System is part of a larger ecolog-
ical corridor, stretching along the Niagara 
Escarpment from Lake Ontario to the tip of 
the Saugeen (Bruce) Peninsula at Georgian 
Bay. Other priority areas include the Fron-
tenac Axis, from Algonquin Provincial Park
 to Lake Ontario; the north shore of Lake 
Superior east of Thunder Bay; a link between 
the Algoma Highlands, Lake Superior and 
Lake Huron, around Sault Ste. Marie; and 
Lake Erie’s north shore, from Windsor to 
the mouth of the Grand River and inland to 
the City of London. 
Morris says that such grand, forward-
thinking vision is essential in both supporting 
the annual movements of species and facilitat-
ing longer-term migrations as ﬂora and fauna 
respond to climate change. The catch is, only 
so much can be done at local and federal lev-
els. Formalizing such corridors is contingent 
on the Ontario government’s assent, Mor-
ris says, since the government controls the 
majority of public land. 
“More and more people understand the 
intrinsic ecosystem values of nature and bio-
diversity,” says Morris. “Over 80 percent of 
Ontarians want more provincial parks. This 
is not a political issue. The disconnect is at 
the provincial level. The Ontario govern-
ment has acknowledged that climate change 
and biodiversity loss are issues, but it contin-
ues to push initiatives that will undermine 
possible conservation gains.” 
Conor Mihell is a freelance writer, author and 
outdoor educator based in Sault Ste. Marie.
Road Ecology 
Tim Gray, the executive director of Environmental Defence, wistfully recalls the hopeful early 
days of Ontario’s Endangered Species Act (ESA), which came into force in 2007. The twin-
ning of Highway 69, north of Parry Sound, was among the ﬁrst infrastructure projects to 
which this widely lauded act pertained. The old two-lane highway was dangerous for drivers 
and wildlife alike, since it passed through sensitive ecosystems. Long stretches of new four-
lane highway were fenced, with culvert underpasses installed to allow wildlife safe transit, 
and a larger wildlife overpass was constructed near the turnoff to Killarney Provincial Park, 
south of Sudbury. “It’s the only such highway overpass Ontario ever built,” laments Gray. A 
subsequent series of exemptions with far-reaching consequences gutted the ESA, Gray adds, 
and Ontario currently lags far behind provinces like Alberta and British Columbia in building 
highways that allow motorists and wildlife to coexist.
Seasonal road closures and barriers installed in the Cootes to Escarpment EcoPark System 
reveal the beneﬁts of allowing wildlife to pass safely around smaller roadways. In another 
example, simple silt fencing the National Capital Commission installed along roads in wetland 
areas in Ottawa’s Greenbelt reduced turtle mortality by over 70 percent. Gray insists that 
Ontario could make a high-proﬁle statement by installing wildlife crossings where Highway 
401 bisects the Frontenac Axis, near Kingston. “Right now, very few mammals, amphibians 
and reptiles get across it alive,” he says. “Underpasses and overpasses would be a great ben-
eﬁt to wildlife and public education. It’s a no-brainer, it would do so much for connectivity, 
and it would also stop people from dying in collisions with wildlife.”
—Conor Mihell

Right now, we are asking all nature lovers, advocates and 
activists to renew your 2025 Ontario Nature membership.
Find out how we’ll put your membership into action in the enclosed
2025 URGENT PRIORITIES REPORT. Your ongoing support plays a crucial 
role in helping us protect Ontario’s wild species and wild spaces.
Together, we can ensure that nature has the edge it needs to thrive! You can give 
today using the reply form enclosed in the report. You can also give online at  
ontarionature.org/renew or call Hayley at 1-800-440-2366.
THANK YOU!
Help Give Nature an
Edge in 2025
Gray Fox (threatened)

For Nature, Forever
Leave A Lasting Legacy
You can protect Ontario’s wild species and wild spaces 
forever by remembering Ontario Nature in your Will.
You are invited to connect with Kirsten Dahl, our 
Director of Development, for a conﬁdential discussion 
about your legacy options. You can reach Kirsten at 
416-444-8419 or 1-800-440-2366 extension 235, or 
kirstend@ontarionature.org.
ontarionature.org/legacy
Charitable #10737 8952 RR0001

onnaturemagazine.com 
Spring 2025 | ON Nature 35
(TOP) MATT FORSYTHE/CITY OF TORONTO; (BOTTOM) GREY BRUCE NATIVE SEED BANK
Nature Network
T
oronto Field Naturalists (TFN) 
is helping the City of Toronto 
explore a novel method for con-
trolling invasive species in nat-
ural areas: goats. The group 
has partnered with the municipal govern-
ment to test “prescribed grazing” as a way 
to manage invasive plants in meadows and 
other habitats.
The city piloted the approach in a 
meadow environment at the Don Valley 
Brick Works property last summer. TFN 
volunteers monitored the site before and 
after goat grazing and will do so again in 
the spring to note changes in plant com-
position and whether the goats trampled 
desired plants. 
Goats have several beneﬁ ts over other 
methods of invasive species control. The 
animals leave desirable meadow plants such 
as milkweed, which they do not eat, while 
devouring bindweed, Queen Anne’s lace, 
buckthorn and other invasive species. Last 
summer, Jason Ramsay, a long-time mem-
ber (including past president) of TFN who 
is involved in the project, watched a goat 
carefully eat bindweed entwined around 
milkweed while leaving the milkweed 
intact. Goat herds can even be trained to 
selectively eat certain plants that property 
managers want removed. These animals 
can also reach places that a mower cannot, 
such as up steep slopes, and can perform 
initial clearing that enables people to better 
see and pull the invasives that remain.
Another beneﬁ t of goats over mowers is 
public engagement. Ramsay saw many vis-
itors show interest in the goats, which gave 
TFN and the city a chance to talk about 
invasive species, biodiversity and native 
ecosystems. 
Collaborations like the one between 
TFN and the City of Toronto are essential 
to achieving conservation goals despite 
limited resources, says Ramsay. The nature 
group has partnered with the city on 
numerous other projects, including vege-
tation monitoring at Cottonwood Flats, a 
restoration project now in its eighth year, 
and other community-based nature stew-
ardship programs. 
While the goats’ effectiveness at con-
trolling invasive plants remains to be 
confirmed, the innovative approach has 
potential to advance conservation in urban 
environments. 
A Conservation Project With Legs
By Lesley Rudy
Nature Network Welcomes Two New Groups
The Grey Bruce Native Seed Bank was formed in 2022 to sustainably collect seed 
adapted to the wild to grow in “seed orchards,” and then harvest and process new 
seed. The resulting large quantities of genetically diverse seed can be used in local 
restoration projects.
The Escarpment Corridor Alliance, formed in 2021, has a mission to protect the 
Niagara Escarpment of South Georgian Bay by creating an ecological corridor across 
the region for nature and future generations of Ontarians.
Caprine conservation: Goat grazing can control invasive species.
GREY BRUCE NATIVE SEED BANK

36 ON Nature | Spring 2025 
onnaturemagazine.com
(TOP) JENNA QUINN; (OPPOSITE PAGE) NOAH COLE
© BILL MACDONALD
BECOME A 
MONTHLY
DONOR
Your monthly gift allows us to 
respond to urgent conservation 
issues and advocate for nature 
when it’s needed most.
You can sign up today as 
a Friend of Nature monthly 
donor by calling Lisa at 
1-800-440-2366 ext. 233.
© BILL MACDONALD
NATURE
NEEDS
YOU
Experience the wonders 
of nature with us on 
Facebook, Instagram 
and X @OntarioNature.
In House
T
en naturalists gathered at a 
YMCA in 1934 to form Kitchener-
Waterloo Field Naturalists, a 
club committed to discovering, 
protecting and enjoying nature. 
About 30 years later, the group—now known as 
Waterloo Region Nature (WRN)—purchased 
35 hectares of land south of Cambridge and 
created the F.W.R. Dickson Wilderness Area.
Members of WRN and Ontario Nature met 
at the property last fall to celebrate 90 years 
of kinship, caring and environmental engage-
ment. As a ﬁ tting tribute, the club donated 
$10,000 to support Ontario Nature’s expan-
sion of its Gananoque Lake Nature Reserve in 
the Frontenac Arch.
“We welcome the opportunity to contrib-
ute to Ontario Nature’s protected lands,” says 
long-time WRN member Graham Macdonald. 
“A small club or organization like our own can 
make a difference by contributing and make 
an impact.”
WRN expert guides Fraser Gibson and 
Janet Ozaruk led participants through three 
habitats within the wilderness area, which 
lies at the northern edge of the Carolinian 
zone. The group ﬁ rst paused on a boardwalk 
traversing a swamp thicket dominated by 
dogwood, willow and highbush cranberry 
shrubs. Continuing over gently rolling ter-
rain, they arrived at the second habitat: 
an oak and hickory forest. “We stopped to 
admire the multi-lobed leaves of sassafras 
trees, the aptly named interrupted fern, the 
tiny strap-like petals of the American witch-
hazel blooms and the fruit of a hearts-bursting-
with-love running strawberry bush,” Ozaruk 
recalls. Climbing up a slope, they emerged 
into the third habitat, where waist-high 
grasses dominated a tallgrass prairie dotted 
with occasional trees, such as the American 
elm and the shagbark hickory.
“It was a true joy to bring together so many 
people from both organizations for this cele-
bration,” says Jenna Quinn, Ontario Nature’s 
conservation science manager. “The hike 
took place at one of the ﬁ rst nature spaces 
in the region to be protected and remains 
much-loved to this day.” 
Interested people can join WRN or donate 
to its Sanctuary Fund at waterlooregion
nature.ca. 
Naturalists celebrate 90 Years 
By Kirsten Dahl
Noble Naturalists: Waterloo Region Nature celebrates nearly a century of conservation.

onnaturemagazine.com 
Spring 2025 | ON Nature 37
From the Blog
O
ntario’s new Provincial Plan-
ning Statement (PPS), which 
overhauls the earlier land-use 
framework, officially came 
into effect in October 2024. 
It merges the 2020 policy statement with 
A Place to Grow, the Ontario government’s 
broader economic plan for the Greater 
Golden Horseshoe. The result effectively 
dismantles the policies that guided sustain-
able growth within one of Ontario’s fastest 
growing regions.
The government says that the new PPS will 
enable “more housing to be built faster in a 
way that protects the environment.” The revi-
sions, however, signiﬁ cantly weaken existing 
environmental protections and put Ontario’s 
natural heritage, farmland and wetlands in 
further jeopardy while encouraging unnec-
essary urban sprawl.
Under the previous plan, key water and 
natural heritage features within the Greater 
Golden Horseshoe were strictly protected 
from development. The new PPS retains pro-
tection for Provincially Signiﬁ cant Wetlands 
but eliminates it for unevaluated wetlands 
and other natural features. Combined with 
the provincial government’s weakened wet-
land evaluation system (see “Keeping Ottawa 
Wet and Wild,” Fall 2024), the effect could be 
devastating for wetland ecosystems.
The new PPS also reduces density targets, 
allowing development in previously pro-
tected areas. The change opens the door for 
more development on the outskirts of cities 
where natural and agricultural lands are cur-
rently found.
“These policy changes are a major setback 
for Ontario,” says Tony Morris, director of 
conservation policy and campaigns at Ontario 
Nature. “By prioritizing sprawl over smart 
growth, the government is undermining our 
ability to address the interrelated crises of 
biodiversity loss and climate change.” 
Greedy gains: T e new Provincial Planning 
Statement weakens environmental protections.
T e Road to Unsustainable Growth
By Jenna Kip
Lands set aside for conservation through the
Forest Stewardship Council certiﬁcation process
present a signiﬁcant opportunity to meet 
Canada’s international commitment to protect 
30% of lands and waters by 2030. These lands 
remain threatened by mining, hydro 
development and changes to forestry plans. 
 CONSERVATION 
LEGACY READY & WAITING
Protecting these lands 
contributes to:
Biodiversity Conservation
Conserving intact ecosystems and 
habitat for wildlife, including species 
at risk.
Climate Regulation
Storing an estimated 400 million tonnes 
of carbon while providing movement 
corridors and refuge for wildlife.
Cultural Revitalization
Protecting areas of cultural and spiritual 
significance when working in partnership 
with Indigenous communities.
Water Protection
Safeguarding water quality and 
hydrological functions.
The Government of Ontario must commit to 
permanently protecting these lands with the 
consent of Indigenous communities.
FOR MORE INFORMATION, VISIT: 
ontarionature.org/designated-conservation-lands.
Photo © What A Ride CC BY-NC-ND 2.0

38 ON Nature | Spring 2025
onnaturemagazine.com
PETE RYAN
protection performance–use PR electoral 
systems. Denmark, which is one of them, in 
2020 enacted one of the strongest climate 
laws in the world because nearly all its polit-
ical parties collaborated on the legislation. 
Policies built through collaboration are 
much more likely to last through changes 
of government and tend to produce less 
polarization around issues. Policy sta-
bility is key to maintaining and building 
environmental legislation. PR helps pro-
vide that needed stability. We need to tell 
our politicians that a PR electoral system 
serves citizens of all political stripes while 
advancing our goal to stabilize our climate 
and protect our environment. Making this 
change will take political will, but politi-
cians of all parties must put the needs of 
their citizens and our climate above the 
needs of their party.
Sharon Sommerville is the former chair of the 
Waterloo Region Fair Vote Canada chapter.
Last Word
T
he provincial government 
recently passed Bill 212, which 
authorizes the construction 
of the controversial Highway 
413, northwest of Toronto. It is 
a perfect example of how our electoral sys-
tem, ﬁrst past the post (FPTP), can under-
mine nature conservation and action to 
mitigate climate change.
The 2022 provincial election delivered 
100 percent of the power to the Progressive 
Conservative Party with only 41 percent of 
the popular vote. Importantly, only 18 per-
cent of the overall electorate voted for the 
government, meaning that our government 
represented a small minority of Ontarians. 
When a political party wins the majority 
of seats, rarely does that mean it won the 
majority of votes. 
With a majority of seats, a new govern-
ment will often undo legislation the previ-
ous government enacted. Bill 212 is a case 
in point. The former Liberal government 
cancelled Highway 413 because of the cat-
astrophic environmental impact it would 
have had on surrounding areas while pro-
viding negligible improvements to trafﬁc 
ﬂow. That bill will remove years of environ-
mental protection and stall environmental 
and climate action.
Why is our FPTP system to blame? Polit-
ical parties need to work together for the 
common good, but FPTP ensures that this 
much-needed cross-party cooperation does 
not happen. The alternative is proportional 
representation (PR), under which the per-
centage of the popular vote a party receives 
determines the number of seats it obtains. A 
party that wins 10 percent of the votes gets 
10 percent of the seats. 
Most Western democracies use some 
form of PR. They also tend to deliver stronger
action to address climate change. The top 
ﬁve countries in the Climate Change Per-
formance Index–an independent moni-
toring tool for tracking countries' climate 
Electoral Reform is Needed for Climate Action   
By Sharon Sommerville   

AT BOOKSTORES AND ONLINE
Explore Ontario’s natural woodlands
with books from Fireﬂ y and Fitzhenry & Whiteside
THE EXPLORER’S 
GUIDE TO ALGONQUIN 
PARK, updated
by Michael Runtz
240 pages in colour
many maps, $29.95
OLD-GROWTH 
FOREST WALKS
The Future of Ontario’s 
Greenbelt
by Michael Henry
290 pages in colour + 
many maps, $29.95
ROAD ROCKS ONTARIO
by Nick Eyles
More than 250 
geological wonders 
shown and explained. 
570 pages in colour, 
$34.95
ONTARIO’S OLD-GROWTH 
FORESTS by Michael Henry 
and Peter Quinby
Expanded 2nd edition
A great guide to nearly 70 old-
growth forests, with improved 
maps. 272 pages in colour, 
paperback, $40.00
OBSERVING NATURE 
BY CANOE & KAYAK
by Michael Runtz
A 360-page full-colour 
photographic guide 
to wildlife and plants. 
$24.95
TOP 70 CANOE ROUTES 
OF ONTARIO
by Kevin Callan
Huge — 440 pages in 
colour, detailed maps 
$35.00
